advocacy_docs/pg_extensions/spl_check/using/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Using EDB SPL Check 
navTitle: Using
---

EDB SPL Check helps you to find errors in an EDB stored procedure that a `CREATE PROCEDURE/FUNCTION` can miss. The following are some methods to check your code with EDB SPL Check. 

## Checking triggers

To check any trigger, enter a relation that's used with the trigger function. For example: 

```sql
CREATE TABLE bar(a int, b int);
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION public.foo_trg()
      RETURNS trigger
      LANGUAGE edbspl
  AS $function$
  BEGIN
    NEW.c := NEW.a + NEW.b;
  RETURN NEW;
  END;
$function$
__OUTPUT__
CREATE FUNCTION
```

When there's no specified relation for the trigger, the following is returned:

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_function('foo_trg()');
__OUTPUT__
ERROR:  missing trigger relation
HINT:  Trigger relation oid must be valid
```

When the trigger is checked successfully with a specified relation, the following is returned:

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_function('foo_trg()', 'bar');
__OUTPUT__
                 spl_check_function                 
--------------------------------------------------------
 error:42703:3:assignment:record "new" has no field "c"
(1 row)
```

For triggers with transitive tables, set the `oldtable` and `newtable` parameters: 

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION footab_trig_func()
RETURNS trigger as $$
DECLARE x int;
BEGIN
  IF false THEN
    -- should be ok;
    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM newtab INTO x; 

    -- should fail;
    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM newtab WHERE d = 10 into x;
  END If;
  RETURN null;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE edbspl;
```
```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_function('footab_trig_func','footab', newtable := 'newtab');
```

## Validating compound triggers

Another way to verify a trigger function is to use `spl_check_trigger()` by providing the trigger name and, optionally, the relation name. This method is useful for redwood-style triggers and compound triggers where trigger functions are created internally. For example: 

```sql
CREATE TABLE tab(a int);
CREATE or REPLACE trigger tg1 before insert on tab
FOR EACH ROW
BEGIN
  NEW.a := NEW.b;
END;
```
```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_trigger('tg1');
__OUTPUT__
               spl_check_trigger
----------------------------------------------------
 error:42703:2:assignment:record "new" has no field "b"
 Context: PL/pgSQL assignment "NEW.a := NEW.b"
(2 rows)
```

## Validating packages

A package can have multiple functions/procedures. To validate all of your functions/procedures at once, you can use `spl_check_package()`. Similarly, use `spl_check_package_tb()` to view the output in tabular format. 

You can also validate individual package functions/procedures using `spl_check_function()`. For example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_package('<package name>');
```

## Validating object types

Object types can have one or more member functions. To validate all the functions at once, use `spl_check_objecttype()`. Similarly, use `spl_check_objecttype_tb()` to view the output in tabular format. 

You can also validate individual object type member functions using `spl_check_function()`. For example: 

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_objecttype('<objecttype name>');
```

## Setting in-comment options

EDB SPL Check allows persistent-setting, written in-comments. These options are taken from a function's source code before checking. The syntax is: 

```sql
@spl_check_option: optionname [=] value [, optname [=] value ...]
```

The settings from comment options have top priority, but generally they can be disabled by setting `use_incomment_options` to `false`. For example: 

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION fx(anyelement)
RETURNS TEXT AS $$
BEGIN
  /*
   * rewrite default polymorphic type to text
   * @spl_check_options: anyelementtype = text
   */
RETURN $1;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE edbspl;
```

## Checking all your code

Use the `spl_check_function()` to check all of your functions/procedures and to check all your triggers. 

To check all nontrigger EDB SPL Check functions:

```sql
SELECT p.oid, p.proname, spl_check_function(p.oid)
FROM pg_catalog.pg_namespace n
JOIN pg_catalog.pg_proc p ON pronamespace = n.oid
JOIN pg_catalog.pg_language l ON p.prolang = l.oid
WHERE l.lanname = 'edbspl' AND p.prorettype <> 2279;
```

To check all trigger EDB SPL Check functions: 

```sql
SELECT p.proname, tgrelid::regclass, cf.*
FROM pg_proc p
JOIN pg_trigger t ON t.tgfoid = p.oid 
JOIN pg_language l ON p.prolang = l.oid
JOIN pg_namespace n ON p.pronamespace = n.oid,
LATERAL spl_check_function(p.oid, t.tgrelid) cf
WHERE n.nspname = 'public' AND l.lanname = 'edbspl';
```

To check all EDB SPL Check functions, including functions or trigger functions with defined triggers: 

```sql
SELECT
    (pcf).functionid::regprocedure, (pcf).lineno, (pcf).statement,
    (pcf).sqlstate, (pcf).message, (pcf).detail, (pcf).hint, (pcf).level,
    (pcf)."position", (pcf).query, (pcf).context
FROM
(
SELECT
    spl_check_function_tb(pg_proc.oid, COALESCE(pg_trigger.tgrelid, 0)) AS pcf
FROM pg_proc
LEFT JOIN pg_trigger
ON (pg_trigger.tgfoid = pg_proc.oid)
WHERE
    prolang = (SELECT lang.oid FROM pg_language lang WHERE lang.lanname = 'edbspl') AND
    pronamespace <> (SELECT nsp.oid FROM pg_namespace nsp WHERE nsp.nspname = 'pg_catalog') AND
    -- ignore unused triggers
    (pg_proc.prorettype <> (SELECT typ.oid FROM pg_type typ WHERE typ.typname = 'trigger') OR
    pg_trigger.tgfoid IS NOT NULL)
OFFSET 0
) ss
ORDER BY (pcf).functionid::regprocedure::text, (pcf).lineno;
```

## Limitations

EDB SPL Check finds almost all errors on static code. However, when using PL/pgSQL's dynamic features like dynamic SQL or the record data type, false positives are possible. In these cases, we recommend that you rewrite the affected function or disable EDB SPL Check for the function. For example: 

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION f1()
RETURNS void AS $$
DECLARE r record;
BEGIN
  FOR r IN EXECUTE 'SELECT * FROM t1'
  LOOP
    RAISE NOTICE '%', r.c;
  END LOOP;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE edbspl SET edbspl.enable_check TO false;
```

!!!Note
    When passive mode is enabled, using EDB SPL Check adds a small overhead. We recommend that you use the setting only in development or preproduction environments. 

### Dynamic SQL

This module doesn't check queries that are assembled in runtime because you can't identify the results of dynamic queries. Therefore, EDB SPL Check can't set the correct type to record variables and can't check a dependent SQL `or` expressions. 

When the type of a record's variable is unknown, you can explicitly assign it with pragma `type`. For example: 

```sql
DECLARE r record;
BEGIN
EXECUTE format('SELECT * FROM %I', _tablename) INTO r;
PERFORM spl_check_pragma('type: r (id int, processed bool)');
IF NOT r.processed THEN
  ...
```

!!! Warning 
    You can't use the SQL injection check for a security audit. This tool detects only some SQL injection vulnerabilities, so it might not detect some issues. It can also raise false alarms. 

### Refcursors

You can't use EDB SPL Check to detect the structure of referenced cursors. A reference on a cursor in EDB SPL Check is implemented as the name of a global cursor. During the check, the name is usually unknown, and the global cursor doesn't exist. This issue is significant when performing any static analysis. EDB SPL Check can't set the correct type for the record variable and can't check the dependent SQL statements or expressions. The solution is the same for dynamic SQL. 

You can use either of these solutions:

- Don't use the the record variable as a target when you use a `refcursor` type. 
- Disable `spl_check` for the affected functions. 

For example:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION foo(refcur_var refcursor)
RETURNS void AS $$
DECLARE
  rec_var record;
BEGIN
FETCH refcur_var INTO rec_var; -- this is STOP for spl_check
RAISE NOTICE '%', rec_var;     -- record rec_var is not assigned yet error
```

In this example, don't use a record type. Instead use a known `rowtype`:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION foo(refcur_var refcursor)
RETURNS void AS $$
DECLARE
  rec_var some_rowtype;
BEGIN
FETCH refcur_var INTO rec_var;
RAISE NOTICE '%', rec_var;
```

### Temporary tables

EDB SPL Check can't verify queries over temporary tables that are created in the `edbspl` function runtime. 

As a solution, you can either:
- Create a fake temporary table.
- Disable EDB SQL Check for this function.

Temporary tables are stored in your own schema with higher priority than persistent tables. So, you can perform this workaround safely:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION public.disable_dml()
RETURNS trigger
LANGUAGE edbspl AS $function$
BEGIN
RAISE EXCEPTION SQLSTATE '42P01'
USING message = format('this instance of %I table doesn''t allow any DML operation', TG_TABLE_NAME),
  hint = format('you should use "CREATE TEMP TABLE %1$I(LIKE %1$I INCLUDING ALL);" statement',
    TG_TABLE_NAME);
RETURN NULL;
END;
$function$;
__OUTPUT__
CREATE FUNCTION
```
```sql
CREATE TABLE foo(a int, b int); -- doesn't hold data, ever
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```
```sql
CREATE TRIGGER foo_disable_dml
BEFORE INSERT OR UPDATE OR DELETE ON foo
EXECUTE PROCEDURE disable_dml();
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TRIGGER
```

```sql
INSERT INTO  foo VALUES(10,20);
__OUTPUT__
ERROR:  this instance of foo table doesn't allow any DML operation
HINT:  you should to run "CREATE TEMP TABLE foo(LIKE foo INCLUDING ALL);" statement
```

```sql
CREATE TEMP TABLE foo(LIKE foo INCLUDING ALL);
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```

```sql
INSERT INTO foo VALUES(10,20);
__OUTPUT__
INSERT 0 1
```

Commit message:

First draft of spl_check enhancement

advocacy_docs/pg_extensions/spl_check/using/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Using EDB SPL Check 
navTitle: Using
---

EDB SPL Check helps you to find errors in an EDB stored procedure that a `CREATE PROCEDURE/FUNCTION` can miss. The following are some methods to check your code with EDB SPL Check. 

## Checking triggers

To check any trigger, enter a relation that's used with the trigger function. For example: 

```sql
CREATE TABLE bar(a int, b int);
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION public.foo_trg()
      RETURNS trigger
      LANGUAGE edbspl
  AS $function$
  BEGIN
    NEW.c := NEW.a + NEW.b;
  RETURN NEW;
  END;
$function$
__OUTPUT__
CREATE FUNCTION
```

When there's no specified relation for the trigger, the following is returned:

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_function('foo_trg()');
__OUTPUT__
ERROR:  missing trigger relation
HINT:  Trigger relation oid must be valid
```

When the trigger is checked successfully with a specified relation, the following is returned:

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_function('foo_trg()', 'bar');
__OUTPUT__
                 spl_check_function                 
--------------------------------------------------------
 error:42703:3:assignment:record "new" has no field "c"
(1 row)
```

For triggers with transitive tables, set the `oldtable` and `newtable` parameters: 

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION footab_trig_func()
RETURNS trigger as $$
DECLARE x int;
BEGIN
  IF false THEN
    -- should be ok;
    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM newtab INTO x; 

    -- should fail;
    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM newtab WHERE d = 10 into x;
  END If;
  RETURN null;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE edbspl;
```
```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_function('footab_trig_func','footab', newtable := 'newtab');
```

## Validating compound triggers

Another way to verify a trigger function is to use `spl_check_trigger()` by providing the trigger name and, optionally, the relation name. This method is useful for redwood-style triggers and compound triggers where trigger functions are created internally. For example: 

```sql
CREATE TABLE tab(a int);
CREATE or REPLACE trigger tg1 before insert on tab
FOR EACH ROW
BEGIN
  NEW.a := NEW.b;
END;
```
```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_trigger('tg1');
__OUTPUT__
               spl_check_trigger
----------------------------------------------------
 error:42703:2:assignment:record "new" has no field "b"
 Context: PL/pgSQL assignment "NEW.a := NEW.b"
(2 rows)
```

## Validating packages

A package can have multiple functions/procedures. To validate all of your functions/procedures at once, you can use `spl_check_package()`. Similarly, use `spl_check_package_tb()` to view the output in tabular format. 

You can also validate individual package functions/procedures using `spl_check_function()`. For example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_package('<package name>');
```

## Validating object types

Object types can have one or more member functions. To validate all the functions at once, use `spl_check_objecttype()`. Similarly, use `spl_check_objecttype_tb()` to view the output in tabular format. 

You can also validate individual object type member functions using `spl_check_function()`. For example: 

```sql
SELECT * FROM spl_check_objecttype('<objecttype name>');
```

## Setting in-comment options

EDB SPL Check allows persistent-setting, written in-comments. These options are taken from a function's source code before checking. The syntax is: 

```sql
@spl_check_option: optionname [=] value [, optname [=] value ...]
```

The settings from comment options have top priority, but generally they can be disabled by setting `use_incomment_options` to `false`. For example: 

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION fx(anyelement)
RETURNS TEXT AS $$
BEGIN
  /*
   * rewrite default polymorphic type to text
   * @spl_check_options: anyelementtype = text
   */
RETURN $1;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE edbspl;
```

## Checking all your code

Use the `spl_check_function()` to check all of your functions/procedures and to check all your triggers. By default `spl_check_function()` only checks the validity of parameters and return types. However, a GUC allows you to use `spl_check_function()` to [validate the function body](#checking-function-bodies) of all function calls (except system functions and system package functions).   

To check all nontrigger EDB SPL Check functions:

```sql
SELECT p.oid, p.proname, spl_check_function(p.oid)
FROM pg_catalog.pg_namespace n
JOIN pg_catalog.pg_proc p ON pronamespace = n.oid
JOIN pg_catalog.pg_language l ON p.prolang = l.oid
WHERE l.lanname = 'edbspl' AND p.prorettype <> 2279;
```

To check all trigger EDB SPL Check functions: 

```sql
SELECT p.proname, tgrelid::regclass, cf.*
FROM pg_proc p
JOIN pg_trigger t ON t.tgfoid = p.oid 
JOIN pg_language l ON p.prolang = l.oid
JOIN pg_namespace n ON p.pronamespace = n.oid,
LATERAL spl_check_function(p.oid, t.tgrelid) cf
WHERE n.nspname = 'public' AND l.lanname = 'edbspl';
```

To check all EDB SPL Check functions, including functions or trigger functions with defined triggers: 

```sql
SELECT
    (pcf).functionid::regprocedure, (pcf).lineno, (pcf).statement,
    (pcf).sqlstate, (pcf).message, (pcf).detail, (pcf).hint, (pcf).level,
    (pcf)."position", (pcf).query, (pcf).context
FROM
(
SELECT
    spl_check_function_tb(pg_proc.oid, COALESCE(pg_trigger.tgrelid, 0)) AS pcf
FROM pg_proc
LEFT JOIN pg_trigger
ON (pg_trigger.tgfoid = pg_proc.oid)
WHERE
    prolang = (SELECT lang.oid FROM pg_language lang WHERE lang.lanname = 'edbspl') AND
    pronamespace <> (SELECT nsp.oid FROM pg_namespace nsp WHERE nsp.nspname = 'pg_catalog') AND
    -- ignore unused triggers
    (pg_proc.prorettype <> (SELECT typ.oid FROM pg_type typ WHERE typ.typname = 'trigger') OR
    pg_trigger.tgfoid IS NOT NULL)
OFFSET 0
) ss
ORDER BY (pcf).functionid::regprocedure::text, (pcf).lineno;
```
### Checking function bodies

When the GUC `spl_check.validate_function_calls` is set to true, `spl_check_function()` looks inside a function to check its validity. Use the `SET` command to set the value of `spl_check.validate_function_calls`. When `spl_check.validate_function_calls` is set to false, `spl_check_function()` only checks parameters and return types for function calls.

Note that for any functions with an OID less than `FirstNormalObjectId`, functions defined in the SYS and PG_CATALOG schema are not checked because they are assumed to be the system functions. Also, system packages and functions written in languages other than edb-spl are skipped.


## Limitations

EDB SPL Check finds almost all errors on static code. However, when using PL/pgSQL's dynamic features like dynamic SQL or the record data type, false positives are possible. In these cases, we recommend that you rewrite the affected function or disable EDB SPL Check for the function. For example: 

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION f1()
RETURNS void AS $$
DECLARE r record;
BEGIN
  FOR r IN EXECUTE 'SELECT * FROM t1'
  LOOP
    RAISE NOTICE '%', r.c;
  END LOOP;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE edbspl SET edbspl.enable_check TO false;
```

!!!Note
    When passive mode is enabled, using EDB SPL Check adds a small overhead. We recommend that you use the setting only in development or preproduction environments. 

### Dynamic SQL

This module doesn't check queries that are assembled in runtime because you can't identify the results of dynamic queries. Therefore, EDB SPL Check can't set the correct type to record variables and can't check a dependent SQL `or` expressions. 

When the type of a record's variable is unknown, you can explicitly assign it with pragma `type`. For example: 

```sql
DECLARE r record;
BEGIN
EXECUTE format('SELECT * FROM %I', _tablename) INTO r;
PERFORM spl_check_pragma('type: r (id int, processed bool)');
IF NOT r.processed THEN
  ...
```

!!! Warning 
    You can't use the SQL injection check for a security audit. This tool detects only some SQL injection vulnerabilities, so it might not detect some issues. It can also raise false alarms. 

### Refcursors

You can't use EDB SPL Check to detect the structure of referenced cursors. A reference on a cursor in EDB SPL Check is implemented as the name of a global cursor. During the check, the name is usually unknown, and the global cursor doesn't exist. This issue is significant when performing any static analysis. EDB SPL Check can't set the correct type for the record variable and can't check the dependent SQL statements or expressions. The solution is the same for dynamic SQL. 

You can use either of these solutions:

- Don't use the the record variable as a target when you use a `refcursor` type. 
- Disable `spl_check` for the affected functions. 

For example:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION foo(refcur_var refcursor)
RETURNS void AS $$
DECLARE
  rec_var record;
BEGIN
FETCH refcur_var INTO rec_var; -- this is STOP for spl_check
RAISE NOTICE '%', rec_var;     -- record rec_var is not assigned yet error
```

In this example, don't use a record type. Instead use a known `rowtype`:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION foo(refcur_var refcursor)
RETURNS void AS $$
DECLARE
  rec_var some_rowtype;
BEGIN
FETCH refcur_var INTO rec_var;
RAISE NOTICE '%', rec_var;
```

### Temporary tables

EDB SPL Check can't verify queries over temporary tables that are created in the `edbspl` function runtime. 

As a solution, you can either:
- Create a fake temporary table.
- Disable EDB SQL Check for this function.

Temporary tables are stored in your own schema with higher priority than persistent tables. So, you can perform this workaround safely:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION public.disable_dml()
RETURNS trigger
LANGUAGE edbspl AS $function$
BEGIN
RAISE EXCEPTION SQLSTATE '42P01'
USING message = format('this instance of %I table doesn''t allow any DML operation', TG_TABLE_NAME),
  hint = format('you should use "CREATE TEMP TABLE %1$I(LIKE %1$I INCLUDING ALL);" statement',
    TG_TABLE_NAME);
RETURN NULL;
END;
$function$;
__OUTPUT__
CREATE FUNCTION
```
```sql
CREATE TABLE foo(a int, b int); -- doesn't hold data, ever
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```
```sql
CREATE TRIGGER foo_disable_dml
BEFORE INSERT OR UPDATE OR DELETE ON foo
EXECUTE PROCEDURE disable_dml();
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TRIGGER
```

```sql
INSERT INTO  foo VALUES(10,20);
__OUTPUT__
ERROR:  this instance of foo table doesn't allow any DML operation
HINT:  you should to run "CREATE TEMP TABLE foo(LIKE foo INCLUDING ALL);" statement
```

```sql
CREATE TEMP TABLE foo(LIKE foo INCLUDING ALL);
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```

```sql
INSERT INTO foo VALUES(10,20);
__OUTPUT__
INSERT 0 1
```
